---
title: Introduction to the Actyx Platform
sidebar_label: The Actyx Platform
---

![](/images/home/actyx_platform.png)

The Actyx platform is an application platform for developing, deploying, running
and monitoring factory automation solutions. With the Actyx platform we
bring a modern development experience to the factory automation space and
provide you with the software and tools that enable you to build better
solutions faster.

On the Actyx platform your solutions run directly at the edge without the need
for a centralized IT infrastructure. Every component in your process that you
want to connect — be it a machine, a robot, a worker or an ERP system — receives
an edge computer. The logic runs directly on these edge devices and
communication happens in a peer-to-peer fashion. This architectural decision
enables us to provide a set of non-functional guarantees that are hard to
achieve in a more centralized system; Solutions that run on the Actyx platform
can stay operational in the face of component failures and even in the face of
network partitions the different components can keep making progress. In a
setting like a factory with extremely high uptime requirements such resilience
can be a huge advantage.

But the Actyx platform is not just useful due to its strong non-functional
guarantees. With the Actyx platform we also support you along the entire
application lifecycle. On the Actyx platform you develop your applications using
the software abstractions that our distributed middleware provides without
needing to worry about setting up databases or message buses. Our suite of
developer tools supports you with packaging and deploying your applications
directly to edge devices. On the edge devices your applications are reliably run
in the application runtimes that we provide and can be monitored without needing
to set up any additional tools. And this is just the beginning. As we continue
developing the Actyx platform we aim to take more and more things off your
shoulders. From providing ready made application components to improving the
tools that you use to develop, deploy and monitor your applications we work hard
to move the development experience forward.

Please also feel free to check out [this
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T36Gsae9woo) which provides a more visual
introduction into some of the core abstractions of the Actyx platform.