---
title: Pond 2.1.0 Released
author: Benjamin Sieffert
author_title: Distributed Systems Engineer at Actyx
author_url: https://github.com/benjamin-actyx
author_image_url: /images/blog/benjamin-sieffert.jpg
tags: [Actyx Pond, Release]
---

Today we have released Pond version 2.1.0 [on npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@actyx/pond).

This version does not bring new functionality; rather, it reduces the amount of exported types by _a
lot_, hiding everything that is not part of the public API.  This will make developing on the Pond
in the IDE of your choice – like in our recommended editor, [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) – much nicer, due to more
relevant auto-complete and auto-import suggestions.

Read on for a brief explanation of how we cleaned up our type exports with the help of a tool called
[API Extractor](https://api-extractor.com/).

<!-- truncate -->

TypeScript and JavaScript do not have a native concept of a "package" – all they know is
_modules_. A module can only consist of _one_ file. It hooks into other modules by importing part of
their exports, and in turn exports some symbols – types, functions, classes, … – of its own.

Hence, functionality can be _private_ to a module – by not being exported –, but there is no native
way to have package-private functionality. In contrast, Java treats every symbol without an explicit
access modifier as package-private by default!

Now turning our eyes on the Pond, our own [npm package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@actyx/pond), there is of course a lot of _internal_
functionality which the client code does not at all need to explicitly interact with. The `type
Pond` declares our _public API_, but the implementation you get a hold of by calling
e.g. `Pond.default()` uses dozens of modules (source files) which are actually _internal_, in the
sense that they only exist to serve the Pond implementation.

So how can we "hide" these internal modules? TypeScript offers one piece of relevant functionality
here, which is the annotation `@internal` that disables inclusion of types or parts of a type in its
generated `d.ts` files. But it would be pretty tedious for us to go through all symbols in the Pond and
annotate with `@internal` where applicable. It would also be very error-prone! What if we
accidentally hid a symbol that is in fact needed to use the public API?

That is where API Extractor comes in. We supply it the "main entry point of our library" – which is
basically just our `type Pond` export – and it automatically traverses the graph of types, collecting
everything needed to use and construct our _root type(s)_. Then it can warn us if we forgot to
export any of the needed types from `index.ts`.

What it can also do is spare us the work of sticking the `@internal` label on everything else; it
offers instead to roll up all public type declarations into one single `d.ts` file. That file is now
being distributed as `dist/pond.d.ts` in our package. It is guaranteed to contain all the types
needed to work with the Pond, and nothing else. Symbols which are not reachable from the public types
are simply omitted.

The final step is that we declare `"types": "dist/pond.d.ts"` in our package.json file. An editor
like VS Code automatically picks up on that, and stops suggesting anything buried deep inside the `lib`
folder. When needed, though, it is still possible for client code using the Pond library to import
internal types from `@actyx/pond/lib/someModule/...`.

We hope this release gives a much improved development experience in your favorite IDE.
In case it does not, [let us know](mailto:developer@actyx.io)!
